Docs-627 - New explore replication section (#5738)
EnterpriseDB/docs: product_docs/docs/pgd/5/quickstart/further_explore_replication.mdx

---
title: Exploring replication with PGD
navTitle: Exploring replication
deepToC: true
---

## Explore replication with PGD

> With the cluster up and running, it's worthwhile to run some basic checks to see how effectively it's replicating.

Reviewer: Consider "useful" instead of "worthwhile." Or, "we recommend running..."  I think this is more precise.

The following example shows one quick way to do this, but you must ensure that any testing you perform is appropriate for your use case.

> * **Preparation**

Reviewer: Would you consider using level 3 heads here instead of bullets and bold?

>   * Ensure the cluster is ready:  

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this can be a link to https://www.enterprisedb.com/docs/pgd/latest/quickstart/?

Author: Thats a tad recursive.... this is ready as in quiescent, not ready as in installed.

Author: Also the instructions on how to do that are explicitly after that srep.

Reviewer 2: True it's just for the scenario where I send someone a direct link to this page.

Author: But also, you'd probably want the version in manual install (once it is synced back up with this one) as that deals in hosts and nodes in the abstract, not the named instances as per the tpa install.

Reviewer 2: It's up to you

Author: ```suggestion
  * Ensure your cluster is ready to perform replication. If you have not installed a cluster yet, use one of the [quickstart](.) guides to get going:  
```

>   * Ensure your cluster is ready to perform replication. If you have not installed a cluster yet, use one of the [quickstart](.) guides to get going:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Ensure your cluster is ready to perform replication. If you haven't installed a cluster yet, use one of the [quick start](.) guides to get going:  
```

>     * Log in to the database on first host. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Log in to the database on the first host. 
```

    * Run `select bdr.wait_slot_confirm_lsn(NULL, NULL);`.  
    * When the query returns, the cluster is ready.  

* **Create data**

>   The simplest way to test that the cluster is replicating is to log in to a node, create a table, and populate it. On the first node, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The simplest way to test that the cluster is replicating is to log in to a node, create a table, populate it, and see the data you populated appear on a second node. On the first node, 
```

Reviewer 2: (Since creating a table and populating doesn't actually on its own tell you anything about replication)

>   The simplest way to test that the cluster is replicating is to log in to a node, create a table, populate it, and see the data you populated appear on a second node. On the first node, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The simplest way to test that the cluster is replicating is to log in to a node, create a table, populate it, and see the data you populated appear on a second node. On the first node:
```

    * Create a table:
      ```sql
      CREATE TABLE quicktest ( id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, value INT ); 
      ```
    * Populate the table:
    ```sql
    INSERT INTO quicktest (value) SELECT random()*10000
    FROM generate_series(1,10000);
    ```
    * Monitor replication performance:
    ```sql
    select * from bdr.node_replication_rates;
    ```
    * Get a sum of the value column (for checking):
    ```sql
    select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
    ```

* **Check data**

>    * Log in to a second node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * To confirm the data was successfully replicated, log in to a second node.
```

     * Get a sum of the value column (for checking):
      ```sql
      select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
      ```

>      * Compare with the result from first node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * Compare with the result from the first node.
```

   * Log in to a third node. 

>      * get a sum of the value column (for checking):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * Get a sum of the value column (for checking):
```

      ```sql
      select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
      ```
   * Compare with the result from the first and second nodes.

## Worked example

### Preparation

> Our cluster has three data nodes, kaboom, kaftan and kaolin. We will use kaboom as our first node. Log in to kaboom and then into kaboom's Postgres server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cluster in this example has three data nodes: kaboom, kaftan, and kaolin. The example uses kaboom as the first node. Log in to kaboom and then into kaboom's Postgres server:
```

```
cd democluster
ssh -F ssh_config kaboom
sudo -iu enterprisedb psql bdrdb
```

#### Ensure the cluster is ready

To ensure that the cluster is ready to go, run: 

```
select bdr.wait_slot_confirm_lsn(NULL, NULL);
__OUTPUT__
 wait_slot_confirm_lsn
-----------------------

(1 row)
```

This query waits if the cluster is busy initializing and returns when the cluster is ready.

### Create data

#### On the first node (kaboom), create a table

Run:

```sql
CREATE TABLE quicktest ( id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, value INT ); 
__OUTPUT__
CREATE TABLE
```

#### On kaboom, populate the table

```
INSERT INTO quicktest (value) SELECT random()*10000 FROM generate_series(1,10000);
__OUTPUT__
INSERT 0 10000
```

> This command generates a table of 10000 rows of random values. 

Reviewer: Consider moving this text before the code example.

#### On kaboom, monitor performance

As soon as possible, run:

```sql
select * from bdr.node_replication_rates;
__OUTPUT__
 peer_node_id | target_name | sent_lsn  | replay_lsn | replay_lag | replay_lag_bytes | replay_lag_size | apply_rate | catchup_interval
--------------+-------------+-----------+------------+------------+------------------+-----------------+------------+------------------
   3490219809 | kaftan      | 0/F57D120 | 0/F57D120  | 00:00:00   |                0 | 0 bytes         |       9158 | 00:00:00
   2111777360 | kaolin      | 0/F57D120 | 0/F57D120  | 00:00:00   |                0 | 0 bytes         |       9293 | 00:00:00
(2 rows)
```

> The command shows statistics about how quickly that data was replicated to the other two nodes:

Reviewer: Should this just end with a period or is something missing? Again, would it be more useful to put before the code, i.e.,

As soon as possible, run the following command. The command shows statistics about how quickly that data was replicated to the other two nodes.

> Note that the replay_lag values are 0, showing no lag, and the LSN values are in sync, meaning the data is already replicated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `replay_lag` values are 0, showing no lag, and the LSN values are in sync, meaning the data is already replicated.
```

#### On kaboom get a checksum

Run:

```sql
select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
```

This command calculates a sum of the values from the generated data:

```sql
bdrdb=# select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
__OUTPUT__
 count  |    sum
--------+-----------
 100000 | 498884606
(1 row)
```

> Your sum will be different because the values in the table are random numbers, but the count should be 100000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your sum will be different because the values in the table are random numbers, but the count will be 100000.
```

### Check data

> Our second host will be "kaftan". In another window (or session), log in to kaftan's Postgres server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second host is kaftan. In another window or session, log in to kaftan's Postgres server:
```

```
cd democluster
ssh -F ssh_config kaftan
sudo -iu enterprisedb psql bdrdb
```

#### On the second node (kaftan), get a checksum

Run:

```sql
select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
```

> This command gets node-two's values for the generated data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command gets the second node's values for the generated data:
```

```sql
bdrdb=# select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
__OUTPUT__
 count  |    sum
--------+-----------
 100000 | 498884606
(1 row)
```

#### Compare with the result from the first node (kaboom)

The values are identical.

You can repeat the process with the third node (kaolin), or generate new data on any node and see it replicate to the other nodes.

#### Log in to the third node (kaolin)

> The last node is kaolin, our third node. In another window(or session), log in to the kaolin and then into kaolin's Postgres server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third and last node is kaolin. In another window or session, log in to kaolin and then into kaolin's Postgres server:
```
Not sure if the notion of "last" is relevant or if you could just say "third."

```
cd democluster
ssh -F ssh_config kaolin
sudo -iu enterprisedb psql bdrdb
```

#### On kaolin, get a checksum

Run:

```sql
select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
```

This command gets kaolin's values for the generated data:

```sql
bdrdb=# select COUNT(*),SUM(value) from quicktest;
__OUTPUT__
 count  |    sum
--------+-----------
 100000 | 498884606
(1 row)
```

#### Compare the results.

> Compare the the result from the first and second nodes (kaboom and kaftan) with the result from kaolin. The values will be identical on all three nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compare the result from the first and second nodes (kaboom and kaftan) with the result from kaolin. The values will be identical on all three nodes.
```
